draft-thomson-http-replay.md, before:

---
title: Using Early Data in HTTP
abbrev: HTTP Early Data
docname: draft-thomson-http-replay-latest
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: ART
workgroup: httpbis
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline, docmapping]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: Yes
    email: mnot@mnot.net
 -
    ins: W. Tarreau
    name: Willy Tarreau
    organization: HAProxy Technologies
    email: willy@haproxy.org


informative:

--- abstract

This document explains the risks of using early data for HTTP and describes
techniques for reducing them. In particular, it defines a mechanism that
enables clients to communicate with servers about early data, to assure correct
operation.


--- middle

# Introduction

TLS 1.3 {{?TLS13=I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} introduces the concept of early data
(also known as zero round trip data or 0-RTT data). Early data allows a client to send data
to a server in the first round trip of a connection, without waiting for the
TLS handshake to complete if the client has spoken to the same server recently.

When used with HTTP {{!HTTP=RFC7230}}, early data allows clients to send
requests immediately, avoiding the one or two round trip delay needed for the
TLS handshake. This is a significant performance enhancement; however, it has
significant limitations.

The primary risk of using early data is that an attacker might capture and
replay the request(s) it contains. TLS {{!TLS13}} describes techniques that can
be used to reduce the likelihood that an attacker can successfully replay a
request, but these techniques can be difficult to deploy, and still leave some
possibility of a successful attack.

Note that this is different from automated or user-initiated retries; replays
are under the control of an attacker, and are therefore malicious.

To help mitigate the risk of replays in HTTP, this document gives an overview
of techniques for controlling these risks in servers, and defines requirements
for clients when sending requests in early data.

The advice in this document also applies to use of 0-RTT in HTTP over QUIC
{{?HQ=I-D.ietf-quic-http}}.


## Conventions and Definitions

The words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" are used in this document.
It's not shouting; when they are capitalized, they have the special meaning
defined in {{!RFC2119}}.


# Supporting Early Data in HTTP Servers

A server decides whether or not to offer a client the ability to send early
data on future connections when sending the TLS session ticket.

When a server enables early data, there are a number of techniques it can use
to mitigate the risks of replay:

1. The server can choose whether it will process early data before the TLS
   handshake completes. By deferring processing, it can ensure that only a
   successfully completed connection is used for the request(s) therein.
   Assuming that a replayed ClientHello will not result in additional
   connections being made by the client, this provides the server with some
   assurance that the early data was not replayed.

2. If the server receives multiple requests in early data, it can determine
   whether to defer HTTP processing on a per-request basis. This may require
   buffering the responses to preserve ordering in HTTP/1.1.

3. The server can cause a client to retry a request and not use early data by
   responding with the 4NN (Too Early) status code ({{status}}), in cases where
   the risk of replay is judged too great.

4. Finally, TLS {{?TLS13}} describes several mitigation strategies that reduce
   the ability of an attacker to successfully replay early data. Servers are
   strongly encouraged to implement these techniques, but to also recognize
   that they are imperfect.  These anti-replay techniques can reduce the number
   of replays that will be successful from being essentially unbounded to a
   fixed value.

For a given request, the level of tolerance to replay risk is specific to the
resource it operates upon (and therefore only known to the origin server). In
general, if processing a request does not have state-changing side effects, the
consequences of replay are not significant.

The request method's safety ({{!RFC7231}}, Section 4.2.1) is one way to
determine this. However, some resources do elect to associate side effects with
safe methods, so this cannot be universally relied upon.

It is RECOMMENDED that origin servers allow resources to explicitly configure
whether early data is appropriate in requests. Absent such explicit
information, they SHOULD mitigate against early data in requests that have
unsafe methods, using the techniques outlined above.

A request might be sent partially in early data with the remainder of the
request being sent after the handshake completes.  This does not necessarily
affect handling of that request; what matters is when the server starts acting
upon the contents of a request.  Any time a server might initiate processing
prior to completion of the handshake needs to consider how a possible replay of
early data could affect that processing.

Intermediary servers do not have sufficient information to make this
determination, so {{status}} describes a way for the origin to signal to them
that a particular request isn't appropriate for early data. Intermediaries that
accept early data MUST implement that mechanism.

Note that a server cannot choose to selectively reject early data at the TLS
layer. TLS only permits a server to accept all early data, or none of it. Once
a server has decided to accept early data, it MUST process all requests in
early data, even if the server rejects the request by sending a 4NN (Too Early)
response.

A server can limit the amount of early data with the `max_early_data_size`
field of the `early_data` TLS extension. This can be used to avoid committing
an arbitrary amount of memory for deferred requests. A server SHOULD ensure
that when it accepts early data, it can defer processing of requests until
after the TLS handshake completes.


# Using Early Data in HTTP Clients

A client that wishes to use early data commences sending HTTP requests
immediately after sending the TLS ClientHello.

By their nature, clients have control over whether a given request is sent in
early data -- thereby giving the client control over risk of replay. Absent
other information, clients MAY send requests with safe HTTP methods (see
{{!RFC7231}}, Section 4.2.1) in early data when it is available, and SHOULD NOT
send unsafe methods (or methods whose safety is not known) in early data.

If the server rejects early data at the TLS layer, a client MUST start sending
again as though the connection was new. For HTTP/2, this means re-sending the
connection preface. Any requests sent in early data MUST be sent again, unless
the client decides to abandon those requests.

This automatic retry exposes the request to a potential replay attack.  An
attacker sends early data to one server instance that accepts and processes the
early data, but allows that connection to proceed no further.  The attacker then
forwards the same messages from the client to another server instance that will
reject early data.  The client the retries the request, resulting in the request
being processed twice.  Replays are also possible if there are multiple server
instances that will accept early data, or if the same server accepts early data
multiple times (though this would be in violation of requirements in TLS).

Clients that use early data MUST retry requests upon receipt of a 4NN (Too
Early) status code; see {{status}}.

An intermediary MUST NOT use early data when forwarding a request unless early
data was used on a previous hop, or it knows that the request can be retried
safely without consequences (typically, using out-of-band configuration).
Absent better information, that means that an intermediary can only use early
data if the request either arrived in early data or arrived with the
`Early-Data` header field set to "1".


# Extensions for Early Data in HTTP

Because HTTP requests can span multiple "hops", it is necessary to explicitly
communicate whether a request has been sent in early data on a previous
connection. Likewise, some means of explicitly triggering a retry when early
data is not desirable is necessary. Finally, it is necessary to know whether the
client will actually perform such a retry.

To meet these needs, two signalling mechanisms are defined:

* The `Early-Data` header field is included in requests that are received in
  early data.

* The 4NN (Too Early) status code is defined for an origin server to indicate
  that a request could not be processed due to the consequences of a possible
  replay attack.

They are designed to enable better coordination of the use of early data
between the user agent and origin server, and also when a gateway (also
"reverse proxy", "Content Delivery Network", or "surrogate") is present.

Gateways typically don't have specific information about whether a given
request can be processed safely when it is sent in early data. In many cases,
only the origin server has the necessary information to decide whether the risk
of replay is acceptable. These extensions allow coordination between a gateway
and its origin server.


## The Early-Data Header Field {#header}

The `Early-Data` request header field indicates that the request has been
conveyed in early data, and additionally indicates that a client understands
the 4NN (Too Early) status code.

It has just one valid value: "1". Its syntax is defined by the following ABNF
{{!ABNF=RFC5234}}:

~~~
Early-Data = "1"
~~~

For example:

~~~
GET /resource HTTP/1.0
Host: example.com
Early-Data: 1
~~~

A client that constructs a request that it sends in early data, even if only
part of the request is sent in early data, MUST include an `Early-Data` header
field with a value of "1".

An intermediary MUST NOT remove this header field if it is present in a request.
An intermediary MAY reject requests that are received in early data if the
`Early-Data` header field is not present.


## The 4NN (Too Early) Status Code {#status}

A 4NN (Too Early) status code indicates that the server is unwilling to risk
processing a request that might be replayed.

Clients (user-agents and intermediaries) that sent the request in early data
MUST automatically retry the request when receiving a 4NN (Too Early) response
status code. Retries of requests MUST NOT be sent in early data, MUST NOT
include the `Early-Data header field, and SHOULD NOT be sent if the TLS
handshake on the original connection does not successfully complete.

Intermediaries that receive the 4NN (Too Early) status code MUST NOT
automatically retry requests when the original request already contained the
`Early-Data` header field with a value of "1"; instead, they MUST forward the
4NN (Too Early) response to the client.  This ensures that the retry is visible
to clients.

The server cannot assume that a client is able to retry a request unless the
`Early-Data` header field is present.  A server SHOULD NOT emit the 4NN status
code unless one of these conditions is met.

The 4NN (Too Early) status code is not cacheable by default. Its payload is not
the representation of any identified resource.


# Security Considerations

Using early data exposes a client to the risk that their request is replayed.  A
retried or replayed request can produce different side effects on the server.
In addition to those side effects, replays and retries might be used for traffic
analysis to recover information about requests or the resources those requests
target.

A gateway that forwards requests that were received in early data MUST only do
so if it knows that the server that receives those requests understands the
`Early-Data` header field and will correctly generate a 4NN (Too Early) status
code.  A gateway that isn't certain about server support SHOULD either delay
forwarding the request until the TLS handshake completes, or send a 4NN (Too
Early) status code in response.  A gateway that is uncertain about whether an
origin server supports the `Early-Data` header field SHOULD disable early data.


# IANA Considerations

This document registers the `Early-Data` header field in the "Message Headers"
registry {{!HEADERS=RFC3864}}.

Header field name:

: Early-Data

Applicable protocol:

: http

Status:

: standard

Author/Change controller:

: IETF

Specification document(s):

: This document

Related information:

: (empty)

This document registers the 4NN (Too Early) status code in the "Hypertext
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Status Code" registry established in {{!RFC7231}}.

Value:

: 4NN

Description:

: Too Early

Reference:

: This document


--- back

Commit message:

Provide better rationale for making Early-Data mandatory

draft-thomson-http-replay.md, after:

---
title: Using Early Data in HTTP
abbrev: HTTP Early Data
docname: draft-thomson-http-replay-latest
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: ART
workgroup: httpbis
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline, docmapping]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: Yes
    email: mnot@mnot.net
 -
    ins: W. Tarreau
    name: Willy Tarreau
    organization: HAProxy Technologies
    email: willy@haproxy.org


informative:

--- abstract

This document explains the risks of using early data for HTTP and describes
techniques for reducing them. In particular, it defines a mechanism that
enables clients to communicate with servers about early data, to assure correct
operation.


--- middle

# Introduction

TLS 1.3 {{?TLS13=I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} introduces the concept of early data
(also known as zero round trip data or 0-RTT data). Early data allows a client to send data
to a server in the first round trip of a connection, without waiting for the
TLS handshake to complete if the client has spoken to the same server recently.

When used with HTTP {{!HTTP=RFC7230}}, early data allows clients to send
requests immediately, avoiding the one or two round trip delay needed for the
TLS handshake. This is a significant performance enhancement; however, it has
significant limitations.

The primary risk of using early data is that an attacker might capture and
replay the request(s) it contains. TLS {{!TLS13}} describes techniques that can
be used to reduce the likelihood that an attacker can successfully replay a
request, but these techniques can be difficult to deploy, and still leave some
possibility of a successful attack.

Note that this is different from automated or user-initiated retries; replays
are under the control of an attacker, and are therefore malicious.

To help mitigate the risk of replays in HTTP, this document gives an overview
of techniques for controlling these risks in servers, and defines requirements
for clients when sending requests in early data.

The advice in this document also applies to use of 0-RTT in HTTP over QUIC
{{?HQ=I-D.ietf-quic-http}}.


## Conventions and Definitions

The words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" are used in this document.
It's not shouting; when they are capitalized, they have the special meaning
defined in {{!RFC2119}}.


# Supporting Early Data in HTTP Servers

A server decides whether or not to offer a client the ability to send early
data on future connections when sending the TLS session ticket.

When a server enables early data, there are a number of techniques it can use
to mitigate the risks of replay:

1. The server can choose whether it will process early data before the TLS
   handshake completes. By deferring processing, it can ensure that only a
   successfully completed connection is used for the request(s) therein.
   Assuming that a replayed ClientHello will not result in additional
   connections being made by the client, this provides the server with some
   assurance that the early data was not replayed.

2. If the server receives multiple requests in early data, it can determine
   whether to defer HTTP processing on a per-request basis. This may require
   buffering the responses to preserve ordering in HTTP/1.1.

3. The server can cause a client to retry a request and not use early data by
   responding with the 4NN (Too Early) status code ({{status}}), in cases where
   the risk of replay is judged too great.

4. Finally, TLS {{?TLS13}} describes several mitigation strategies that reduce
   the ability of an attacker to successfully replay early data. Servers are
   strongly encouraged to implement these techniques, but to also recognize
   that they are imperfect.  These anti-replay techniques can reduce the number
   of replays that will be successful from being essentially unbounded to a
   fixed value.

For a given request, the level of tolerance to replay risk is specific to the
resource it operates upon (and therefore only known to the origin server). In
general, if processing a request does not have state-changing side effects, the
consequences of replay are not significant.

The request method's safety ({{!RFC7231}}, Section 4.2.1) is one way to
determine this. However, some resources do elect to associate side effects with
safe methods, so this cannot be universally relied upon.

It is RECOMMENDED that origin servers allow resources to explicitly configure
whether early data is appropriate in requests. Absent such explicit
information, they SHOULD mitigate against early data in requests that have
unsafe methods, using the techniques outlined above.

A request might be sent partially in early data with the remainder of the
request being sent after the handshake completes.  This does not necessarily
affect handling of that request; what matters is when the server starts acting
upon the contents of a request.  Any time a server might initiate processing
prior to completion of the handshake needs to consider how a possible replay of
early data could affect that processing.

Intermediary servers do not have sufficient information to make this
determination, so {{status}} describes a way for the origin to signal to them
that a particular request isn't appropriate for early data. Intermediaries that
accept early data MUST implement that mechanism.

Note that a server cannot choose to selectively reject early data at the TLS
layer. TLS only permits a server to accept all early data, or none of it. Once
a server has decided to accept early data, it MUST process all requests in
early data, even if the server rejects the request by sending a 4NN (Too Early)
response.

A server can limit the amount of early data with the `max_early_data_size`
field of the `early_data` TLS extension. This can be used to avoid committing
an arbitrary amount of memory for deferred requests. A server SHOULD ensure
that when it accepts early data, it can defer processing of requests until
after the TLS handshake completes.


# Using Early Data in HTTP Clients

A client that wishes to use early data commences sending HTTP requests
immediately after sending the TLS ClientHello.

By their nature, clients have control over whether a given request is sent in
early data -- thereby giving the client control over risk of replay. Absent
other information, clients MAY send requests with safe HTTP methods (see
{{!RFC7231}}, Section 4.2.1) in early data when it is available, and SHOULD NOT
send unsafe methods (or methods whose safety is not known) in early data.

If the server rejects early data at the TLS layer, a client MUST start sending
again as though the connection was new. For HTTP/2, this means re-sending the
connection preface. Any requests sent in early data MUST be sent again, unless
the client decides to abandon those requests.

This automatic retry exposes the request to a potential replay attack.  An
attacker sends early data to one server instance that accepts and processes the
early data, but allows that connection to proceed no further.  The attacker then
forwards the same messages from the client to another server instance that will
reject early data.  The client the retries the request, resulting in the request
being processed twice.  Replays are also possible if there are multiple server
instances that will accept early data, or if the same server accepts early data
multiple times (though this would be in violation of requirements in TLS).

Clients that use early data MUST retry requests upon receipt of a 4NN (Too
Early) status code; see {{status}}.

An intermediary MUST NOT use early data when forwarding a request unless early
data was used on a previous hop, or it knows that the request can be retried
safely without consequences (typically, using out-of-band configuration).
Absent better information, that means that an intermediary can only use early
data if the request either arrived in early data or arrived with the
`Early-Data` header field set to "1".


# Extensions for Early Data in HTTP

Because HTTP requests can span multiple "hops", it is necessary to explicitly
communicate whether a request has been sent in early data on a previous
connection. Likewise, some means of explicitly triggering a retry when early
data is not desirable is necessary. Finally, it is necessary to know whether the
client will actually perform such a retry.

To meet these needs, two signalling mechanisms are defined:

* The `Early-Data` header field is included in requests that are received in
  early data.

* The 4NN (Too Early) status code is defined for an origin server to indicate
  that a request could not be processed due to the consequences of a possible
  replay attack.

They are designed to enable better coordination of the use of early data
between the user agent and origin server, and also when a gateway (also
"reverse proxy", "Content Delivery Network", or "surrogate") is present.

Gateways typically don't have specific information about whether a given
request can be processed safely when it is sent in early data. In many cases,
only the origin server has the necessary information to decide whether the risk
of replay is acceptable. These extensions allow coordination between a gateway
and its origin server.


## The Early-Data Header Field {#header}

The `Early-Data` request header field indicates that the request has been
conveyed in early data, and additionally indicates that a client understands
the 4NN (Too Early) status code.

It has just one valid value: "1". Its syntax is defined by the following ABNF
{{!ABNF=RFC5234}}:

~~~
Early-Data = "1"
~~~

For example:

~~~
GET /resource HTTP/1.0
Host: example.com
Early-Data: 1
~~~

A client that constructs a request that it sends in early data, even if only
part of the request is sent in early data, MUST include an `Early-Data` header
field with a value of "1".

An intermediary MUST NOT remove this header field if it is present in a request.
An intermediary MAY reject requests that are received in early data if the
`Early-Data` header field is not present.


## The 4NN (Too Early) Status Code {#status}

A 4NN (Too Early) status code indicates that the server is unwilling to risk
processing a request that might be replayed.

Clients (user-agents and intermediaries) that sent the request in early data
MUST automatically retry the request when receiving a 4NN (Too Early) response
status code. Retries of requests MUST NOT be sent in early data, MUST NOT
include the `Early-Data header field, and SHOULD NOT be sent if the TLS
handshake on the original connection does not successfully complete.

Intermediaries that receive the 4NN (Too Early) status code MUST NOT
automatically retry requests when the original request already contained the
`Early-Data` header field with a value of "1"; instead, they MUST forward the
4NN (Too Early) response to the client.  This ensures that the retry is visible
to clients.

The server cannot assume that a client is able to retry a request unless the
`Early-Data` header field is present.  A server SHOULD NOT emit the 4NN status
code unless one of these conditions is met.

The 4NN (Too Early) status code is not cacheable by default. Its payload is not
the representation of any identified resource.


# Security Considerations

Using early data exposes a client to the risk that their request is replayed.  A
retried or replayed request can produce different side effects on the server.
In addition to those side effects, replays and retries might be used for traffic
analysis to recover information about requests or the resources those requests
target.

## Gateways and Early Data

A gateway that forwards requests that were received in early data MUST only do
so if it knows that the server that receives those requests understands the
`Early-Data` header field and will correctly generate a 4NN (Too Early) status
code.  A gateway that isn't certain about server support SHOULD either delay
forwarding the request until the TLS handshake completes, or send a 4NN (Too
Early) status code in response.  A gateway that is uncertain about whether an
origin server supports the `Early-Data` header field SHOULD disable early data.

## Consistent Handling of Early Data

Consistent treatment of a request that arrives in - or partially in - early data
is critical to avoiding inappropriate processing of replayed requests.  Requests
that might be processed prior to the handshake completing MUST be processed the
same way, even if the handshake is complete when processing occurs.

Depending on the details of a TLS implementation, an attacker might be able to
delay packet arrival so that requests are processed after the handshake
completes.  Those requests might appear to be safe to handle, but this doesn't
guarantee that they were not processed prior to handshake completion on a
connection where the early data was replayed.

To avoid this confusion, the `Early-Data` header field is mandatory to use when
sending requests in early data.  A server MUST NOT process request with this
header field unless it determines that it is free from side-effects.  Otherwise,
the server MUST consistently use the same approach: either using the 4NN status
code, or delaying processing until the handshake completes.


# IANA Considerations

This document registers the `Early-Data` header field in the "Message Headers"
registry {{!HEADERS=RFC3864}}.

Header field name:

: Early-Data

Applicable protocol:

: http

Status:

: standard

Author/Change controller:

: IETF

Specification document(s):

: This document

Related information:

: (empty)

This document registers the 4NN (Too Early) status code in the "Hypertext
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Status Code" registry established in {{!RFC7231}}.

Value:

: 4NN

Description:

: Too Early

Reference:

: This document


--- back
